Introduce IP Diagnostics Mode (#37918)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/optimizing-builds/isolated_projects.adoc

If you have never enabled the feature in the build before, it's likely that the build is not compatible and contains Isolated Projects <<sec:constraint_violations,constraint violations>>.
In that case the build will fail, and one or more violations will be shown in the error message.

[[sec:diagnostics_mode]]
=== Diagnostics mode

_Diagnostics_ mode is an *opt-in* mode that helps you discover Isolated Projects <<sec:constraint_violations,constraint violations>> more efficiently during migration.

> It runs all <<sec:perf_tasks,configuration>> *sequentially*, so every violation across every project is reported in a single invocation, regardless of where it occurs.

Reviewer: :x: This is a non sequitur as currently worded, what about:
```suggestion
It runs all <<sec:perf_tasks,configuration>> *sequentially*, which allows the build to safely continue even after an IP violation. This means that every violation across every project can be reported in a single invocation, regardless of where it occurs.
```

Enable _Diagnostics_ mode by setting `org.gradle.unsafe.isolated-projects.diagnostics=true` in `gradle.properties`, or by passing it on the command line alongside `-Dorg.gradle.unsafe.isolated-projects=true`:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./gradlew help \
    -Dorg.gradle.unsafe.isolated-projects=true \
    -Dorg.gradle.unsafe.isolated-projects.diagnostics=true
----

Compared to normal Isolated Projects, _Diagnostics_ mode disables several optimizations to maximize the completeness of the violation report:

* Project configuration runs *sequentially* instead of in parallel.
* Configuration Cache store runs *sequentially*.
* Per-project model reuse across builds is *disabled*, so every model is rebuilt after an input change.
* All projects are configured, ignoring any configure-on-demand setting.

> These trade-offs make _Diagnostics_ mode unsuitable for day-to-day operations.

Reviewer: :x: I don't know if this is the right wording. We would like to encourage the use of this in CI to validate that no regression in IP compatibility is introduced by changes to a build, which I think is still "day-to-day". What about:
```suggestion
These trade-offs make _Diagnostics_ mode unsuitable for typical operations.
```

Author: I'm okay with the alternative wording. I'll apply it.

Regarding the recommendation of using it on CI, I'm not sure what the purpose would be.

If you've already migrated to IP, then IP should just be enabled on CI (making things faster!). If a violation is introduced, just like any problem failing some build validation, the build will fail, and that would be the signal. The D-mode can then be used to investigate.

If you are still migrating to IP and want something on CI, then you should have the IP-violation baselining mechanism that we haven't introduced yet.

Did you have something else in mind for the CI use case?

Reviewer: I was referring to the baselining mechanism.

Use it only to enumerate violations, such as during the migration, or to compare against the default Isolated Projects path when investigating a discrepancy.

[NOTE]
====
_Diagnostics_ mode does not affect top-level Configuration Cache reuse.
If you run the same invocation twice without any input changes, the second run still reuses the cached entry and reports nothing, because all violations were already reported on the cache-miss run.

> Modify a build input (for example, edit a build script) between runs to re-exercise configuration.

Reviewer: ❓ Why do we do this? If we're already deoptimizing on purpose, what prevents us from deoptimizing here too?

Author: If there are any violations, the CC entry won't be stored or will be discarded. So we are only talking about a violation-free invocation. If the build is fully IP and CC compatible, I don't see a strong reason to re-run the configuration.

> we're already deoptimizing on purpose

Our goal is not to deoptimize, but to reintroduce the determinism of project configuration, while still detecting IP violations. The part about reconfiguring all projects is about surfacing more potential issues. We might in the future decide to force-evaluate more configuration work with the same goal.

If a de-optimization doesn't contribute to the user getting more useful information, then I see no reason why we'd intentionally make things slower.

Reviewer: I would reword this to be clearer then. I read it as we would still store CC entry on violations for some reason.

Author: Reworded

+
You can find the Isolated Projects violations in the Configuration Cache HTML report.
Use the report to pinpoint the incompatible pieces of build logic and plugins.
+
For builds with many projects, also enable <<sec:diagnostics_mode,Diagnostics mode>>

> to surface violations across every project in a single invocation.

Reviewer: :x: We should say something about when to remove it too.

Author: I ended up rewriting this section. I also noted that the D-mode shouldn't be enabled persistently in the middle of its own section
